.TH FLOAT 3X "August 1, 1990"
.SH NAME
float \- tile kernel floating point arithmetic functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B float
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.IR tile
forth kernel extends the Forth-83 Standard with arithmetic functions
for 32-bit floating point numbers. When the "float" vocabulary is
used floating point numbers will be recognized by "interpret", the
kernel compiler and interpreter. The function "?float" is the "float"
recognizer function.
.TP
.B 
code ?float ( str -- [str false] or [f1 true]) recognizer
Given a null-terminated string, "str", scans for a 32-bit
floating point number. Returns the value and "true" else the
string and "false". This word is the "float" vocabulary literal
recognizer function. The function will also recognize the symbols
"Infinity", "-Infinity", and "NaN" (not a number) which are defined
by the IEEE single precision floating point number system.
.TP
.B 
code 1/f ( f1 -- f2)
"f2" is the 32-bit floating point result of dividing one by "f1".
.TP
.B 
code f* ( f1 f2 -- f3)
"f3" is the 32-bit floating point product of "f1" and "f2".
.TP
.B
code f+ ( f1 f2 -- f3)
"f3" is the 32-bit floating point arithmetic sum of "f1" and "f2".
.TP
.B
code f- ( f1 f2 -- f3)
"f3" is the 32-bit floating point result of subtracting "f2" from "f1".
.TP
.B
code f. ( f1 -- )
The 32-bit floating point number "f1" is displayed in the standard format
on the current output stream.
.TP
.B
code f/ ( f1 f2 -- f3)
"f3" is the 32-bit floating point number the quotient of "f1" divided by
the divisor "f2". An error condition results if the divisor is zero. 
.TP
.B
code f>i ( f1 -- i1)
The 32-bit floating point number "f1" is converted to a 32-bit integer.
.TP
.B
vocabulary float ( -- )
The floating pointer number extension vocabulary. Include into the
vocabulary search set, "context", to allow access to these extensions.
.TP
.B
code fnegate ( f1 -- f2)
"f2" is the negated value of the floating point value "f1", i.e., 
the difference of zero less "f1".
.TP
.B
code i>f ( i1 -- f1)
The 32-bit integer "i1" is converted to a 32-bit floating point number,
"f1".
.\" .SH INTERNALS 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR tile(1),
.IR forth(3X).
.\" .SH EXAMPLES
.SH NOTE
The function list is sorted in ASCII order. The type and mode 
of the entries are indicated together with their parameter stack effect.
.\" .SH WARNING
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH COPYING
Copyright (C) 1990 Mikael R.K. Patel
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies
of this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions
of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, 
provided also that the section entitled "GNU General Public
License" is included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under
the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
this manual into another language, under the above conditions
for modified versions, except that the section entitled "GNU
General Public License" may be included in a translation approved
by the author instead of in the original English.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Mikael R.K. Patel
Computer Aided Design Laboratory (CADLAB)
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linkoping University
S-581 83 LINKOPING
SWEDEN
Email: mip@ida.liu.se
.if
