.TH MEMORY 3X "August 1, 1990"
.SH NAME
memory \- tile kernel dynamic memory allocation functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "memory"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.IR tile
forth kernel support word set for dynamic memory allocation
and reclaim from the run-time heap. Used by the kernel to
allocate memory for tasks, entries, strings, etc.
.TP
.B
code free ( addr -- )
Returns an allocated block of memory back to the run-time heap.
.TP
.B
code malloc ( bytes -- addr)
Allocates a block of size "bytes" and returns a pointer to the
memory area. Returns "nil" if the heap is saturated.
.TP
.B
vocabulary memory ( -- )
Vocabulary containing the heap management extension. Include
into the vocabulary search set, "context", to allow access of this
library.
.TP
.B
code realloc ( bytes addr1 -- addr2)
Resizes an allocated block on the heap. If the new size is
larger than the grow size of the block a new block is
allocated and the old blocks contains is copied and released
back to the memory pool.
.\" .SH INTERNALS
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR tile(1),
.IR forth(3X).
.\" .SH EXAMPLES
.SH NOTE
The function list is sorted in ASCII order. 
The type and mode of the entries are indicated together with 
their parameter stack effect.
.\" .SH WARNING
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH COPYING
Copyright (C) 1990 Mikael R.K. Patel
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies
of this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions
of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, 
provided also that the section entitled "GNU General Public
License" is included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under
the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
this manual into another language, under the above conditions
for modified versions, except that the section entitled "GNU
General Public License" may be included in a translation approved
by the author instead of in the original English.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Mikael R.K. Patel
Computer Aided Design Laboratory (CADLAB)
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linkoping University
S-581 83 LINKOPING
SWEDEN
Email: mip@ida.liu.se
.if
