.TH STRING 3X "September 7, 1990"
.SH NAME
string \- tile kernel null-terminated string functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "string"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.IR tile
forth kernel support word set for null-terminated strings.
Used by the kernel to maintain strings in vocabularies, etc.
Strings are not allocated from the forth dictionary.
.TP
.B 
code " ( -- str) immediate
Used in the following form:
.br
.B
" 
.I <any-string>
.B
"
.br
to compile a string literal. A string is not bounded by any size
as it is null terminated. A double quote character cannot be part of
the string.
.TP
.B
code $print ( str -- )
Displays a string on the current output device.
.TP
.B
code $allot ( n -- str)
Allocates storage for a string of max length "n". The 
string may be reclaimed with the function "$free".
.TP
.B
code $cat ( str1 str2 -- )
Concatenates "str2" to "str1" and returns the pointer to
"str2". "str2" is assumed to have space for "str1" and should
have a minimum length of both strings.
.TP
.B
code $dup ( str1 -- str1 str2)
Returns copy of the parameter string. The copy is
equivalent to the parameter but is allocated to another 
memory area. The copy should be reclaimed with the function
"$free".
.TP
.B 
code $equal ( str1 str2 -- bool)
Compares the two strings and returns "true" if they are 
equal else "false".
.TP
.B
code $free ( str -- )
Returns allocated string storage to the run-time heap.
.TP
.B
code $length ( str -- num)
Returns the length of the string not counting the null
character terminating the string. A string may have zero
length.
.TP
.B
code (") ( -- str) compilation
Compiled run-time action for string literal. Pushes a pointer
to the inline string onto the parameter stack. Compiled by
the word """.
.TP
.B
vocabulary string ( -- )
Vocabulary containing the null-terminated string definitions.
Include into the vocabulary search structure, "context", to
allow access to these extensions.
.\" .SH INTERNALS
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR tile(1),
.IR forth(3X).
.\" .SH EXAMPLES
.SH NOTE
The function list is sorted in ASCII order. The type and mode of
the entries are indicated together with their parameter stack effect.
.\" .SH WARNING
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH COPYING
Copyright (C) 1990 Mikael R.K. Patel
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies
of this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions
of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, 
provided also that the section entitled "GNU General Public
License" is included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under
the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of
this manual into another language, under the above conditions
for modified versions, except that the section entitled "GNU
General Public License" may be included in a translation approved
by the author instead of in the original English.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Mikael R.K. Patel
Computer Aided Design Laboratory (CADLAB)
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linkoping University
S-581 83 LINKOPING
SWEDEN
Email: mip@ida.liu.se
.if
